fix(typescript-estree): only run projectService setHostConfiguration when needed (#9336)
typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint: docs/troubleshooting/Performance.mdx

See [Glob pattern in parser's option "project" slows down linting](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/2611) for more details.

## Changes to `extraFileExtensions` with `projectService`

> Changes to [`extraFileExtensions`](../packages/Parser.mdx#extrafileextensions) between files in the same project with

Reviewer: [Docs] Nice tip I've picked up, using different wording in the header vs. the body. The two tend to have different kind of phrasing, and this body text is a bit more precise.

```suggestion
Using a different `extraFileExtensions`](../packages/Parser.mdx#extrafileextensions) between files in the same project with
```

> the [`projectService`](../packages/Parser.mdx#projectservice) option is likely to cause more overhead than expected updating the project.

Reviewer: [Docs] For succinctness:

```suggestion
the [`projectService`](../packages/Parser.mdx#projectservice) option may cause performance degredations.
```

> The optimal approach is to use the same `extraFileExtensions` value across all files in the project.

Reviewer: [Docs] Redundant with the previous sentence, I think.

```suggestion
```

> For every file linted, we update the `projectService` whenever `extraFileExtensions` changes to match your ESLint options.

Reviewer: [Docs] Redundant:

```suggestion
For every file linted, we update the `projectService` whenever `extraFileExtensions` changes.
```

> This causes the underlying TypeScript server to perform a full project reload to account for new and removed files from the project.

Reviewer: [Docs] Not necessary to mention for this, I think:

```suggestion
This causes the underlying TypeScript server to perform a full project reload.
```

See [Glob pattern in parser's option "project" slows down linting](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/2611) for more details.

## Changes to `extraFileExtensions` with `projectService` in your ESLint options

> Using different [`extraFileExtensions`](../packages/Parser.mdx#extrafileextensions) for different files with [`projectService`](../packages/Parser.mdx#projectservice) will cause a full project reload.

Reviewer: [Docs]

> will cause a full project reload

This is a little vague out of context. Can you be a bit more specific? In what scenario(s) does it cause the reload? How does that impact code? How would a user observe this?

Author: Changing `extraFileExtensions` with tsservers `setHostConfiguration` causes tsserver to initiate a project reload to update the project structure with the extension changes: https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/blob/b1c52c53cc6c8cf35b19accfc3e29916489c821e/src/server/editorServices.ts#L3781

Tsserver does not appear to do any checks if the old file extensions match the new file extensions.

The current implementation of `typescript-estree` updates the file extension for every file when `extraFileExtensions` is set.  This compounds with plugins like `vue-eslint-parser` where each template fragment triggers this.

This PR caches the last set `extraFileExtensions` to minimize these project reloads.

Users can further optimize, which is why I added it to the docs, by making sure `extraFileExtensions` is only set once.

I can merge in main now that the logging PR was accepted to expose tsserver logs and provide some examples.

A user could look for this log message as an example: https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/blob/b1c52c53cc6c8cf35b19accfc3e29916489c821e/src/server/editorServices.ts#L3825

Reviewer: Oh, just clarifying, I meant those questions as rhetorical. They're things that the docs should answer. I'm requesting additions to the docs. Sorry for not being clear 😅

Author: Additions have been added.  Let me know if additional detail is needed in any area.

I added my [own comment](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/pull/9336#discussion_r1643353701) to point out a creative liberty taken to help with readability.

I can revert for accuracy if preferred.

Reviewer: These additions are fantastic! I hadn't thought of adding an FAQ article, but it makes a ton of sense. Strong +1 😄

See [Glob pattern in parser's option "project" slows down linting](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/2611) for more details.

## Changes to `extraFileExtensions` with `projectService` in your ESLint options

Using different [`extraFileExtensions`](../packages/Parser.mdx#extrafileextensions) for different files with
[`projectService`](../packages/Parser.mdx#projectservice) causes the TypeScript server to perform a full project reload.
Project reloads can be observed using the [debug environment variable](../packages/typescript-estree/#debugging): `DEBUG='typescript-eslint:typescript-estree:*'`.

```

> typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService Updating extra file extensions: before=[]: after=[ '.vue' ]

Author: I trimmed these log messages on the left so they would (mostly) fit horizontally on screen.  If accuracy is preferred, I can undo this.

```typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService```

vs

```2024-06-17T16:58:28.942Z typescript-eslint:typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService```

Reviewer: Yeah +1 this is preferable IMO. I don't think users will be upset at not having to read through arbitrary timestamps. 😄

Reviewer: That being said, could you move this debug information to the bottom? I think it'd be easier for folks to have the order be:

1. Introduction to this idea (don't change `extraFileExtensions` between files)
2. Why this is the case (full project reloads)
3. Ancillary info, like debugging tips

See [Glob pattern in parser's option "project" slows down linting](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/2611) for more details.

> ## Changes to `extraFileExtensions` with `projectService` in your ESLint options

Reviewer: [Docs] A bit more trim:

```suggestion
## Changes to `extraFileExtensions` with `projectService`
```

[`projectService`](../packages/Parser.mdx#projectservice), the TypeScript server must perform a full project reload.
Project reloads can be observed using the [debug environment variable](../packages/typescript-estree/#debugging): `DEBUG='typescript-eslint:typescript-estree:*'`.

```
typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService Updating extra file extensions: before=[]: after=[ '.vue' ]
typescript-estree:tsserver:info reload projects.
typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService Extra file extensions updated: [ '.vue' ]
...
typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService Updating extra file extensions: before=[ '.vue' ]: after=[]
typescript-estree:tsserver:info reload projects.
typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService Extra file extensions updated: []
...
typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService Updating extra file extensions: before=[]: after=[ '.vue' ]
typescript-estree:tsserver:info reload projects.
typescript-estree:useProgramFromProjectService Extra file extensions updated: [ '.vue' ]
```

As files are received, if `extraFileExtensions` differs from the previous file,
the TypeScript server is updated to match your ESLint options.

> The TypeScript server incrementally updates the project structure by creating an execution pipeline.

Reviewer: [Docs] I think we can get away without mentioning the concept of the execution pipeline...

```suggestion
```

If the ordering of files received from ESLint happens to frequently alternate the value of `extraFileExtensions`,

> a project reload may occur before the last pipeline completes.
> In turn, this can lead to cascading performance issues.
> 
> ```
> typescript-estree:tsserver:info Scheduled: /path/to/tsconfig.src.json, Cancelled earlier one +0ms
> typescript-estree:tsserver:info Scheduled: *ensureProjectForOpenFiles*, Cancelled earlier one +0ms
> ```
> 
> The impact of setting `extraFileExtensions` per file type in a project may be negligible depending on the order files are received.
> That said, complex ESLint options, cached linting results altering which files are evaluated,

Reviewer: ...and trimming out further details that enforce the idea of _"don't let this change"_:

```suggestion
```

and switching between files with different `extraFileExtensions` while using
[typescript-eslint-language-service](https://www.npmjs.com/package/typescript-eslint-language-service)
may all be sources of unintended project reloads.
The optimal approach to avoid project reloads altogether is to use the same `extraFileExtensions` across `parserOptions`.

> <Tabs groupId="eslint-config">

Reviewer: [Praise] These diffs are very helpful 🙂 nice!

export default [
  {
    files: ['*.ts'],
    languageOptions: {
      parser: tseslint.parser,
      parserOptions: {
        projectService: true,
        // Add this line
        extraFileExtensions,
      },
    },
  },
  {
    files: ['*.vue'],
    languageOptions: {
      parser: vueParser,
      parserOptions: {
        projectService: true,
        parser: tseslint.parser,
        // Remove this line
        extraFileExtensions: ['.vue'],
        // Add this line
        extraFileExtensions,
      },
    },
  },
];
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Legacy Config">

```js title=".eslintrc.js"
// Add this line
const extraFileExtensions = ['.vue'];
module.exports = {
  files: ['*.ts'],
  parser: '@typescript-eslint/parser',
  parserOptions: {
    projectService: true,
    // Add this line
    extraFileExtensions,
  },
  overrides: [
    {
      files: ['*.vue'],
      parser: 'vue-eslint-parser',
      parserOptions: {
        parser: '@typescript-eslint/parser',
        projectService: true,
        // Remove this line
        extraFileExtensions: ['.vue'],
        // Add this line
        extraFileExtensions,
      },
    },
  ],
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> ## The `indent` / `@typescripst-eslint/indent` rules

Reviewer: oopity

```suggestion
## The `indent` / `@typescript-eslint/indent` rules
```
